arXiv:1704.03477v4 [cs.NE] 19 May 2017

A Neural Representation of Sketch Drawings
David Ha
Google Brain
hadavid@google.com

Douglas Eck
Google Brain
deck@google.com

Abstract
We present sketch-rnn, a recurrent neural network (RNN) able to construct
stroke-based drawings of common objects. The model is trained on a dataset of
human-drawn images representing many different classes. We outline a framework
for conditional and unconditional sketch generation, and describe new robust
training methods for generating coherent sketch drawings in a vector format.

1 Introduction
Recently, there have been major advancements in generative modelling of images using neural
networks as a generative tool. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5], Variational Inference
(VI) [15], and Autoregressive (AR) [19] models have become popular tools in this fast growing area.
Most of the work thus far has been targeted towards modelling low resolution, pixel images. Humans,
however, do not understand the world as a grid of pixels, but rather develop abstract concepts to
represent what we see. From a young age, we develop the ability to communicate what we see
by drawing on paper with a pencil or crayon. In this way we learn to express a sequential, vector
representation of an image as a short sequence of strokes. In this paper we investigate an alternative
to traditional pixel image modelling approaches, and propose a generative model for vector images.

Figure 1: Latent space interpolation of various vector images produced by our model.
Our goal is to train machines to draw and generalize abstract concepts in a manner similar to humans.
As a first step towards this goal, we train our model on a dataset of hand-drawn sketches, each
represented as a sequence of motor actions controlling a pen: which direction to move, when to lift
the pen up, and when to stop drawing. In doing so, we created a model that potentially has many
applications, from assisting the creative process of an artist, to helping teach students how to draw.
This paper makes the following contributions: We outline a framework for both unconditional and
conditional generation of vector images composed of a sequence of lines. Our recurrent neural
network-based generative model is capable of producing sketches of common objects in a vector
format. We develop a training procedure unique to vector images to make the training more robust. In

the conditional generation model, we explore the latent space developed by the model to represent a
vector image. We also discuss potential creative applications of our methodology. We make available
a large dataset of hand drawn vector images to encourage further development of generative modelling
for vector images, and also release an implementation of our model as an open source project.1

2 Related Work
There is a long history of work related to algorithms that mimic painters. One such work is Portrait
Drawing by Paul the Robot [23, 25], where an underlying algorithm controlling a mechanical robot
arm sketches lines on a canvas with a programmable artistic style to mimic a given digitized portrait
of a person. Reinforcement Learning based-approaches [25] have been developed to discover a set of
paint brush strokes that can best represent a given input photograph. These prior works generally
attempt to mimic digitized photographs, rather than develop generative models of vector images.
Neural Network-based approaches have been developed for generative models of images, although
the majority of neural network-related research on image generation deal with pixel images [5, 10,
12, 14, 19, 24]. There has been relatively little work done on vector image generation using neural
networks. An earlier work [22] makes use of Hidden Markov Models to synthesize lines and curves
of a human sketch. More recent work [6] on handwriting generation with Recurrent Neural Networks
laid the groundwork for utilizing Mixture Density Networks [1] to generate continuous data points.
Recent works of this approach attempted to generate vectorized Kanji characters unconditionally [7]
and conditionally [26] by modelling Chinese characters as a sequence of pen stroke actions.
In addition to unconditionally generating sketches, we also explore encoding existing sketches
into a latent space of embedding vectors. Previous work [2] outlined a methodology to combine
Sequence-to-Sequence models with a Variational Autoencoder to model natural English sentences in
latent vector space. A related work [16], utilizes probabilistic program induction, rather than neural
networks, to perform one-shot modelling of the Omniglot dataset containing images of symbols.
One of the factors limiting research development in the space of generative vector drawings is the
lack of publicly available datasets. Previously, the Sketch dataset [4], consisting of 20K vector
sketches, was used to explore feature extraction techniques. A subsequent work, the Sketchy dataset
[20], provided 70K vector sketches along with corresponding pixel images for various classes. This
allowed for a larger-scale exploration of human sketches. ShadowDraw [17] is an interactive system
that predicts what a finished drawing looks like based on a set of incomplete brush strokes from the
user while the sketch is being drawn. ShadowDraw used a dataset of 30K raster images combined
with extracted vectorized features. In this work, we use a much larger dataset of vector sketches that
is made publicly available.

3 Methodology
3.1 Dataset
We constructed QuickDraw, a dataset of vector drawings obtained from Quick, Draw! [11], an online
game where the players are asked to draw objects belonging to a particular object class in less than 20
seconds. QuickDraw consists of hundreds of classes of common objects. Each class of QuickDraw
is a dataset of 70K training samples, in addition to 2.5K validation and 2.5K test samples.
We use a data format that represents a sketch as a set of pen stroke actions. This representation is an
extension of the format used in [6]. Our format extends the binary pen stroke event into a multi-state
event. In this data format, the initial absolute coordinate of the drawing is located at the origin. A
sketch is a list of points, and each point is a vector consisting of 5 elements: (∆x, ∆y, p1 , p2 , p3 ).
The first two elements are the offset distance in the x and y directions of the pen from the previous
point. The last 3 elements represents a binary one-hot vector of 3 possible states. The first pen state,
p1 , indicates that the pen is currently touching the paper, and that a line will be drawn connecting the
next point with the current point. The second pen state, p2 , indicates that the pen will be lifted from
the paper after the current point, and that no line will be drawn next. The final pen state, p3 , indicates
that the drawing has ended, and subsequent points, including the current point, will not be rendered.
1

The code and dataset is available at https://magenta.tensorflow.org/sketch_rnn.

2

3.2 Sketch-RNN

Figure 2: Schematic diagram of sketch-rnn.
Our model is a Sequence-to-Sequence Variational Autoencoder (VAE), similar to the architecture
described in [2, 15]. Our encoder is a bidirectional RNN [21] that takes in a sketch as an input, and
outputs a latent vector of size Nz . Specifically, we feed the sketch sequence, S, and also the same
sketch sequence in reverse order, Sreverse , into two encoding RNNs that make up the bidirectional
RNN, to obtain two final hidden states:
h→ = encode→ (S), h← = encode← (Sreverse ), h = [ h→ ; h← ]

(1)

We take this final concatenated hidden state, h, and project it into two vectors µ and σ̂, each of size
Nz , using a fully connected layer. We convert σ̂ into a non-negative standard deviation parameter
σ using an exponential operation. We use µ and σ, along with N (0, I), a vector of IID Gaussian
variables of size Nz , to construct a random vector, z ∈ RNz , as in the approach for a VAE [15]:
 σ̂ 
µ = Wµ h + bµ , σ̂ = Wσ h + bσ , σ = exp
, z = µ + σ N (0, I)
(2)
2
Under this encoding scheme, the latent vector z is not a deterministic output for a given input sketch,
but a random vector conditioned on the input sketch.
Our decoder is an autoregressive RNN that samples output sketches conditional on a given latent
vector z. The initial hidden states h0 , and optional cell states c0 (if applicable) of the decoder RNN is
the output of a single layer network: [ h0 ; c0 ] = tanh(Wz z + bz )
At each step i of the decoder RNN, we feed the previous point, Si−1 and the latent vector z in as
a concatenated input xi , where S0 is defined as (0, 0, 1, 0, 0). The output at each time step are the
parameters for a probability distribution of the next data point Si . In Equation 3, we model (∆x, ∆y)
as a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) with M normal distributions as in [1, 6], and (q1 , q2 , q3 ) as
a categorical distribution to model the ground truth data (p1 , p2 , p3 ), where (q1 + q2 + q3 = 1) as
done in [7] and [26]. Unlike [6], our generated sequence is conditioned from a latent code z sampled
from our encoder, which is trained end-to-end alongside the decoder.
p(∆x, ∆y) =

M
X
j=1

Πj N (∆x, ∆y | µx,j , µy,j , σx,j , σy,j , ρxy,j ), where

M
X

Πj = 1

(3)

j=1

N (x, y|µx , µy , σx , σy , ρxy ) is the probability distribution function for a bivariate normal distribution.
Each of the M bivariate normal distributions consist of five parameters: (µx , µy , σx , σy , ρxy ), where
µx and µy are the means, σx and σy are the standard deviations, and ρxy is the correlation parameter of
each bivariate normal distribution. An additional vector Π of length M , also a categorical distribution,
are the mixture weights of the Gaussian mixture model. Hence the size of the output vector y is
5M + M + 3, which includes the 3 logits needed to generate (q1 , q2 , q3 ).
The next hidden state of the RNN, generated with its forward operation, projects into the output
vector yi using a fully-connected layer:
xi = [ Si−1 ; z ], [ hi ; ci ] = forward(xi , [ hi−1 ; ci−1 ]), yi = Wy hi +by , yi ∈ R6M +3 (4)

The vector yi is broken down into the parameters of the probability distribution of the next data point:
[ (Π̂1 µx µy σ̂x σ̂y ρ̂xy )1 ... (Π̂1 µx µy σ̂x σ̂y ρ̂xy )M (q̂1 q̂2 q̂3 ) ] = yi
3

(5)

As in [6], we apply exp and tanh operations to ensure the standard deviation values are non-negative,
and that the correlation value is between -1 and 1:
σx = exp(σ̂x ), σy = exp(σ̂y ), ρxy = tanh(ρ̂xy )

(6)

The probabilities for the categorical distributions are calculated using the outputs as logit values:
exp(Π̂k )
exp(q̂k )
q k = P3
, k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, Πk = PM
, k ∈ {1, ... , M }
exp(q̂
)
j
j=1
j=1 exp(Π̂j )

(7)

A key challenge is to train our model to know when to stop drawing. Because the probabilities of
the three pen stroke events are highly unbalanced, the model becomes more difficult to train. The
probability of a p1 event is much higher than p2 , and the p3 event will only happen once per drawing.
The approach developed in [7] and later followed by [26] was to use different weightings for each
pen event when calculating the losses, such as a hand-tuned weighting of (1, 10, 100). We find this
approach to be inelegant and inadequate for our dataset of diverse image classes.
We develop a simpler, more robust approach that works well for a broad class of sketch drawing data.
In our approach, all sequences are generated to a length of Nmax where Nmax is the length of the
longest sketch in our training dataset. In principle Nmax can be considered a hyper parameter. As the
length of S is usually shorter than Nmax , we set Si to be (0, 0, 0, 0, 1) for i > Ns . We discuss the
training in detail in the next section.
After training, we can sample sketches from our model. During the sampling process, we generate
the parameters for both GMM and categorical distributions at each time step, and sample an outcome
Si0 for that time step. Unlike the training process, we feed the sampled outcome Si0 as input for the
next time step. We continue to sample until p3 = 1, or when we have reached i = Nmax . Like the
encoder, the sampled output is not deterministic, but a random sequence, conditioned on the input
latent vector z. We can control the level of randomness we would like our samples to have during the
sampling process by introducing a temperature parameter τ :
q̂k →

q̂k
Π̂k
, Π̂k →
, σx2 → σx2 τ, σy2 → σy2 τ
τ
τ

(8)

We can scale the softmax parameters of the categorial distribution and also the σ parameters of the
bivariate normal distribution by a temperature parameter τ , to control the level of randomness in
our samples. τ is typically set between 0 and 1. In the limiting case as τ → 0, our model becomes
deterministic and samples will consist of the most likely point in the probability density function.
Figure 3 illustrates of effect of sampling sketches with various temperature parameters.
3.3 Unconditional Generation

Figure 3: Unconditional generation of firetrucks, yoga poses, gardens and owls with varying τ .
As a special case, we can also train our model to generate sketches unconditionally, where we only
train the decoder RNN module, without any input or latent vectors. By removing the encoder, the
decoder RNN as a standalone model is an autoregressive model without latent variables. In this use
case, the initial hidden states and cell states of the decoder RNN are initialized to zero. The inputs xi
0
of the decoder RNN at each time step is only Si−1 or Si−1
, as we do not need to concatenate a latent
vector z. In Figure 3, we sample various sketch images generated unconditionally by varying the
temperature parameter from τ = 0.2 at the top in blue, to τ = 0.9 at the bottom in red.
4

3.4 Training
Our training procedure follows the approach of the Variational Autoencoder [15], where the loss
function is the sum of two terms: the Reconstruction Loss, LR , and the Kullback-Leibler Divergence
Loss, LKL . We train our model to optimize this two-part loss function. The Reconstruction loss
term, described in Equation 9, maximizes the log-likehood of the generated probability distribution
to explain the training data S. We can calculate this reconstruction loss, LR , using the generated
parameters of the pdf and the training data S. LR is composed of the sum of the log loss of the offset
terms (∆x, ∆y), Ls , and the log loss of the pen state terms (p1 , p2 , p3 ), Lp :
Ns
M
X

1 X
Ls = −
log
Πj,i N (∆xi , ∆yi | µx,j,i , µy,j,i , σx,j,i , σy,j,i , ρxy,j,i )
Nmax i=1
j=1
(9)
N
3
max
1 X X
Lp = −
pk,i log(qk,i ), LR = Ls + Lp
Nmax i=1
k=1

Note that we discard the pdf parameters modelling the (∆x, ∆y) points beyond Ns when calculating
Ls , while Lp is calculated using all of the pdf parameters modelling the (p1 , p2 , p3 ) points until
Nmax . Both terms are normalized by the total sequence length Nmax . We found this methodology of
loss calculation to be more robust and allows the model to easily learn when it should stop drawing,
unlike the earlier mentioned method of assigning importance weightings to p1 , p2 , and p3 .
The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss term measures the difference between the distribution of
our latent vector z, to that of an IID Gaussian vector with zero mean and unit variance. Optimizing
for this loss term allows us to minimize this difference. We use the result in [15], and calculate the
KL loss term, LKL , normalized by number of dimensions Nz of the latent vector:

1 
LKL = −
1 + σ̂ − µ2 − exp(σ̂)
(10)
2Nz
The loss function in Equation 11 is a weighted sum of both the LR and LKL loss terms:
Loss = LR + wKL LKL
(11)
There is a tradeoff between optimizing for one term over the other. As wKL → 0, our model
approaches a pure autoencoder, sacrificing the ability to enforce a prior over our latent space while
obtaining better reconstruction loss metrics. Note that for unconditional generation, where our model
is the standalone decoder, there will be no LKL term as we only optimize for LR .

Figure 4: Tradeoff between LR and LKL , for two models trained on single class datasets (left).
Validation Loss Graph for models trained on the Yoga dataset using various wKL . (right)
Figure 4 illustrates the tradeoff between different settings of wKL and the resulting LR and LKL
metrics on the test set, along with the LR metric on a standalone decoder RNN for comparison.
As the unconditional model does not receive any prior information about the entire sketch it needs
to generate, the LR metric for the standalone decoder model serves as an upper bound for various
conditional models using a latent vector.

4 Experiments
We conduct several experiments with sketch-rnn for both conditional and unconditional vector
image generation. We train sketch-rnn on various QuickDraw classes using various settings for
5

wKL and record the breakdown of losses. To experiment with a diverse set of classes with varying
complexities, we select the cat, pig, face, firetruck, garden, owl, mosquito and yoga class. We also
experiment on multi-class datasets by concatenating different classes together to form (cat, pig) and
(crab, face, pig, rabbit). The results for test set evaluation on various datasets are displayed in Table 1.
The sketch-rnn model treats the RNN cell as an abstract component. In our experiments, we
use Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [9] as the encoder RNN. For the decoder RNN, we use
HyperLSTM, as this type of RNN cell excels at sequence generation tasks [8]. The ability for
HyperLSTM to spontaneously augment its own weights enables it to adapt to many different regimes
in a large diverse dataset. For model configuration details, please see the Supplementary Material.
Dataset
cat
pig
cat, pig
crab, face, pig, rabbit
face
firetruck
garden
owl
mosquito
yoga

wKL = 1.00

wKL = 0.50

wKL = 0.25

Decoder Only

LR
-0.98
-1.14
-1.02
-0.91
-1.13
-1.24
-0.79
-0.93
-0.67
-0.80

LR
-1.33
-1.37
-1.24
-1.04
-1.55
-1.26
-0.81
-1.03
-1.02
-1.07

LR
-1.46
-1.52
-1.50
-1.47
-1.90
-1.78
-0.99
-1.29
-1.41
-1.51

LR
-0.57
-0.82
-0.75
-0.67
-0.73
-0.90
-0.62
-0.66
-0.34
-0.48

LKL
0.29
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.27
0.22
0.20
0.20
0.30
0.24

LKL
0.70
0.49
0.49
0.40
0.71
0.24
0.25
0.34
0.66
0.55

LKL
1.01
0.80
0.98
1.17
1.44
1.10
0.54
0.77
1.54
1.33

Table 1: Loss figures (LR and LKL ) for various wKL settings.
The relative loss numbers are consistent with our expectations. We see that the reconstruction loss
term LR decreases as we relax the wKL parameter controlling the weight for the KL loss term, and
meanwhile the KL loss term LR increases as a result. The LR for the conditional model is strictly
less than the unconditional, standalone decoder model. In Figure 4 (right), we plot validation-set loss
graphs for on the yoga class for models with various wKL settings. As LR decreases, the LKL term
tends to increase due to the tradeoff between LR and LKL .
4.1 Conditional Reconstruction
We qualitatively assess the reconstructed sketch S 0 given an input sketch S. In Figure 5 (left), we
sample several reconstructions at various levels of temperature τ using a model trained on the single
cat class, starting at 0.01 on the left and linearly increasing to 1.0 on the right. The reconstructed cat
sketches have similar properties as the input image, and occasionally add or remove details such as a
whisker, a mouth, a nose, or the orientation of the tail.

Figure 5: Conditional generation of cats (left) and pigs (right).
When presented with a non-standard image of a cat, such as a cat’s face with three eyes, the
reconstructed cat only has two eyes. If we input a sketch from another image class, such a toothbrush,
the model seemingly generate sketches with similar orientation and properties as the toothbrush
input image, but with some cat-like features such as cat ears, whiskers or feet. We perform a similar
experiment with a model trained on the pig class, as shown in Figure 5 (right).
6

4.2 Latent Space Interpolation
By interpolating between latent vectors, we can visualize how one image morphs into another image
by visualizing the reconstructions of the interpolations. As we enforce a Gaussian prior on the latent
space, we expect fewer gaps in the space between two encoded latent vectors. We expect a model
trained using a higher wKL setting to produce images that are closer to the data manifold given a
spherically interpolated [24] latent vector z, compared to another model trained with a lower wKL .

Figure 6: Latent space interpolation between cat and pig using with various wKL settings (left).
Sketch Drawing Analogies (right).
To demonstrate this, we train several models using various wKL , on a dataset consisting of both cat
and pigs, and we encode two distinct images from the test set - a cat face and a full pig. Figure 6
(left) shows the reconstructed images from the interpolated latent vectors between the two original
images. As expected, models trained with higher wKL produce more coherent interpolated images.
4.3 Sketch Drawing Analogies
The interpolation example in Figure 6 (left) suggests that the latent vector z encode conceptual
features of a sketch. Can we use these features to augment other sketches without such features – for
example, adding a body to a cat’s head? Indeed, we find that sketch drawing analogies are possible
for models trained with low LKL numbers. Given the smoothness of the latent space, where any
interpolated vector between two latent vectors results in a coherent sketch, we can perform vector
arithmetic on the latent vectors encoded from different sketches and explore how the model organizes
the latent space to represent different concepts in the manifold of generated sketches.
For example, as shown in Figure 6 (right), we can subtract the latent vector of an encoded pig head
from the latent vector of a full pig, to arrive at a vector that represents a body. Adding this difference
to the latent vector of a cat head results in a full cat (i.e. cat head + body = full cat). We repeat the
experiment to remove the body of a full pig. These drawing analogies allow us to explore how the
model organizes its latent space to represent different concepts in the manifold of generated sketches.
4.4 Predicting Different Endings of Incomplete Sketches

Figure 7: sketch-rnn predicting possible endings of various incomplete sketches (the red lines).
We can use sketch-rnn to finish an incomplete sketch. By using the decoder RNN as a standalone
model, we can generate a sketch that is conditioned on the previous points. We use the decoder RNN
to first encode an incomplete sketch into a hidden state h. Afterwards, we generate the remaining
points of the sketch using h as the initial hidden state. We show results in Figure 7 using decoder-only
models trained on individual classes, and sample completions by setting τ = 0.8.
7

5 Applications and Future Work
We believe sketch-rnn will enable many creative applications. Even the decoder-only model trained
on various classes can assist the creative process of an artist by suggesting many possible ways of
finishing a sketch, helping artists expand their imagination. In the conditional model, exploring the
latent space between different objects can potentially enable artists to find interesting intersections
and relationships between different drawings. Even in the simplest use, pattern designers can apply
sketch-rnn to generate a large number of similar, but unique designs for textile or wallpaper prints.
As we saw earlier in Section 4.1, a model trained to draw pigs can be made to draw pig-like trucks if
given an input sketch of a truck. We can extend this result to applications that might help creative
designers come up with abstract designs that can resonate more with their target audience. For
instance, in Figure 8 (right), we feed sketches of four different chairs into our cat-drawing model to
produce four “chair-like cats”. We can even interpolate between the four images to explore the latent
space of chair-like cats, and select from a large grid of generated designs.

Figure 8: Generating similar, but unique sketches based on a single human sketch in the box (left).
Latent space of generated cats conditioned on sketch drawings of chairs (right).
A model trained on higher quality sketches may find its way into educational applications that can
help teach students how to draw. Even with the simple sketches in QuickDraw, the authors of this
work have become much more proficient at drawing animals, insects, and various sea creatures after
conducting these experiments. A related application is to encode a crude, poorly sketched drawing
and generate more aesthetically looking reproductions by using a model trained with a high wKL
setting and sampling with a low temperature τ to produce a more coherent version of the drawing. In
the future, we can also investigate augmenting the latent vector in the direction that maximizes the
aesthetics of the drawing by incorporating user-rating data into the training process.
Combining hybrid variations of sequence-generation models with unsupervised, cross-domain pixel
image generation models, such as Image-to-Image models [3, 13, 18], is another exciting direction
that we can explore. We can already combine this model with supervised, cross-domain models such
as Pix2Pix [10], to occasionally generate photo realistic cat images from generated sketches of cats.
The opposite direction of converting a photograph of a cat into an unrealistic, but similar looking
sketch of a cat composed of a minimal number of lines seems to be a more interesting problem.

6 Conclusion
In this work, we develop a methodology to model sketch drawings using recurrent neural networks.
sketch-rnn is able to generate possible ways to finish an existing, but unfinished sketch drawing.
Our model can also encode existing sketches into a latent vector, and generate similar looking sketches
conditioned on the latent space. We demonstrate what it means to interpolate between two different
sketches by interpolating between its latent space, and also show that we can manipulate attributes
of a sketch by augmenting the latent space. We demonstrate the importance of enforcing a prior
distribution on the latent vector for coherent vector image generation during interpolation. By making
available a large dataset of sketch drawings, we hope to encourage further research and development
in the area of generative vector image modelling.
8

References
[1] C. M. Bishop. Mixture density networks. Technical Report, 1994.
[2] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai, R. Józefowicz, and S. Bengio. Generating Sentences from
a Continuous Space. CoRR, abs/1511.06349, 2015.
[3] H. Dong, P. Neekhara, C. Wu, and Y. Guo. Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation with Generative
Adversarial Networks. ArXiv e-prints, Jan. 2017.
[4] M. Eitz, J. Hays, and M. Alexa. How Do Humans Sketch Objects? ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. SIGGRAPH),
31(4):44:1–44:10, 2012.
[5] I. Goodfellow. NIPS 2016 Tutorial: Generative Adversarial Networks. ArXiv e-prints, Dec. 2017.
[6] A. Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.
[7] D. Ha. Recurrent Net Dreams Up Fake Chinese Characters in Vector Format with TensorFlow, 2015.
[8] D. Ha, A. M. Dai, and Q. V. Le. HyperNetworks. In ICLR, 2017.
[9] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 1997.
[10] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros. Image-to-Image Translation with Conditional Adversarial
Networks. ArXiv e-prints, Nov. 2016.
[11] J. Jongejan, H. Rowley, T. Kawashima, J. Kim, and N. Fox-Gieg. The Quick, Draw! - A.I. Experiment.
https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/, 2016.
[12] C. Kaae Sønderby, T. Raiko, L. Maaløe, S. Kaae Sønderby, and O. Winther. Ladder Variational Autoencoders. ArXiv e-prints, Feb. 2016.
[13] T. Kim, M. Cha, H. Kim, J. Lee, and J. Kim. Learning to Discover Cross-Domain Relations with Generative
Adversarial Networks. ArXiv e-prints, Mar. 2017.
[14] D. P. Kingma, T. Salimans, and M. Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse autoregressive
flow. CoRR, abs/1606.04934, 2016.
[15] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. ArXiv e-prints, Dec. 2013.
[16] B. M. Lake, R. Salakhutdinov, and J. B. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning through probabilistic
program induction. Science, 350(6266):1332–1338, Dec. 2015.
[17] Y. J. Lee, C. L. Zitnick, and M. F. Cohen. Shadowdraw: Real-time user guidance for freehand drawing. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’11, pages 27:1–27:10, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[18] M.-Y. Liu, T. Breuel, and J. Kautz. Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation Networks. ArXiv e-prints,
Mar. 2017.
[19] S. Reed, A. van den Oord, N. Kalchbrenner, S. Gómez Colmenarejo, Z. Wang, D. Belov, and N. de Freitas.
Parallel Multiscale Autoregressive Density Estimation. ArXiv e-prints, Mar. 2017.
[20] P. Sangkloy, N. Burnell, C. Ham, and J. Hays. The Sketchy Database: Learning to Retrieve Badly Drawn
Bunnies. ACM Trans. Graph., 35(4):119:1–119:12, July 2016.
[21] M. Schuster, K. K. Paliwal, and A. General. Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing, 1997.
[22] S. Simhon and G. Dudek. Sketch interpretation and refinement using statistical models. In Proceedings of
the Fifteenth Eurographics Conference on Rendering Techniques, EGSR’04, pages 23–32, Aire-la-Ville,
Switzerland, Switzerland, 2004. Eurographics Association.
[23] P. Tresset and F. Fol Leymarie. Portrait drawing by paul the robot. Comput. Graph., 37(5):348–363, Aug.
2013.
[24] T. White. Sampling Generative Networks. ArXiv e-prints, Sept. 2016.
[25] N. Xie, H. Hachiya, and M. Sugiyama. Artist agent: A reinforcement learning approach to automatic
stroke generation in oriental ink painting. In ICML. icml.cc / Omnipress, 2012.
[26] X. Zhang, F. Yin, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, and Y. Bengio. Drawing and Recognizing Chinese Characters with
Recurrent Neural Network. CoRR, abs/1606.06539, 2016.

9

Supplementary Material for “A Neural Representation of Sketch Drawings”

1 Dataset Details

Figure 1: Example sketch drawings from QuickDraw dataset.
The data from Quick, Draw! [4] expands daily, and every so often new classes are added to the game.
As such, the QuickDraw dataset now consists of hundreds of classes, from 75 classes initially, in
Table 1. Each class consists of 70K training samples and 2.5K validation and test samples. Stroke
simplification using the Ramer–Douglas–Peucker algorithm [3] with a parameter of  = 2.0 has been
applied to simplify the lines. The data was originally recorded in pixel-dimensions, so we normalized
the offsets (∆x, ∆y) using a single scaling factor. This scaling factor was calculated to adjust the
offsets in the training set to have a standard deviation of 1. For simplicity, we do not normalize the
offsets (∆x, ∆y) to have zero mean, since the means are already relatively small.
alarm clock
bicycle
castle
duck
flamingo
key
paintbrush
pineapple
roller coaster
snowflake

ambulance
book
cat
elephant
flower
lighthouse
palm tree
postcard
sandwich
speedboat
the mona lisa

angel
bridge
chair
eye
garden
lion
parrot
power outlet
scorpion
spider
toothbrush

ant
bulldozer
couch
face
hand
map
passport
rabbit
sea turtle
strawberry
truck

barn
bus
crab
fan
hedgehog
mermaid
peas
radio
sheep
swan
whale

basket
butterfly
cruise ship
fire hydrant
helicopter
octopus
penguin
rain
skull
swing set
windmill

bee
cactus
dolphin
firetruck
kangaroo
owl
pig
rhinoceros
snail
tennis racquet

Table 1: Initial 75 QuickDraw classes used for this work.
Figure 2 below shows a training example, before normalization of (∆x, ∆y) columns.

Figure 2: A sample sketch, as a sequence of (∆x, ∆y, p1 , p2 , p3 ) points and in rendered form.
In the rendered sketch, the line color corresponds to the sequential stroke ordering.

1

2 Training Details
As a recap from the main text, we defined the Reconstruction loss term LR ) as:
Ls = −
Lp = −

1

Ns
X

Nmax i=1
1

log

j=1

N
3
max X
X

Nmax i=1

LR = Ls + Lp

M
X

Πj,i N (∆xi , ∆yi | µx,j,i , µy,j,i , σx,j,i , σy,j,i , ρxy,j,i )



(1)

pk,i log(qk,i )

k=1

We also defined the KL loss term LKL as:
LKL = −


1 
1 + σ̂ − µ2 − exp(σ̂)
2Nz

(2)

The loss function in Equation 3 is a weighted sum of both the LR and LKL loss terms:
Loss = LR + wKL LKL

(3)

While the loss function in Equation 3 can be used during training, we find that annealing the KL term
in the loss function (Equation 4) produced better results. This modification is only used for model
training, and the original loss function in Equation 3 is still used to evaluate validation and test sets,
and for early stopping.
ηstep = 1 − (1 − ηmin )Rstep
Losstrain = LR + wKL ηstep max(LKL , KLmin )

(4)

We find that annealing the KL loss term generally results in better losses. Annealing the LKL
term in the loss function directs the optimizer to first focus more on the reconstruction term in
Equation 1, which is the more difficult loss term of the model to optimize for, before having to deal
with optimizing for the KL loss term in Equation 2, a far simpler expression in comparison. This
approach has been used in [2, 5, 7]. Our annealing term ηstep starts at ηmin (typically 0 or 0.01) at
training step 0, and converges to 1 for large training steps. R is a term close to, but less than 1.
If the distribution of z is close enough to N (0, I), we can sample sketches from the decoder using
randomly sampled z from N (0, I) as the input. In practice, we find that going from a larger LKL
value (LKL > 1.0) to a smaller LKL value of ∼ 0.3 generally results in a substantial increase in the
quality of sampled images using randomly sampled z ∼ N (0, I). However, going from LKL = 0.3
to LKL values closer to zero does not lead to any further noticeable improvements. Hence we find it
useful to put a floor on LKL in the loss function by enforcing max(LKL , KLmin ) in Equation 4.
The KLmin term inside the max operator is typically set to a small value such as 0.10 to 0.50. This
term will encourage the optimizer to put less focus on optimizing for the KL loss term LKL once it is
low enough, so we can obtain better metrics for the reconstruction loss term LR . This approach is
similar to the approach described in [7] as free bits, where they apply the max operator separately
inside each dimension of the latent vector z.

3 Model Configuration
Our encoder and decoder RNNs consist of 512 and 2048 nodes respectively. In our model, we use
M = 20 mixture components for the decoder RNN. The latent vector z has Nz = 128 dimensions.
We apply Layer Normalization [1] to our model, and during training apply recurrent dropout [9] with
a keep probability of 90%. We train the model with batch sizes of 100 samples, using Adam [6] with
a learning rate of 0.0001 and gradient clipping of 1.0. All models are trained with KLmin = 0.20,
R = 0.99999. During training, we perform simple data augmentation by multiplying the offset
columns (∆x, ∆y) by two IID random factors chosen uniformly between 0.90 and 1.10. Unless
mentioned otherwise, all experiments are conducted with wKL = 1.00.
2

4 Model Limitations
Although sketch-rnn can model a large variety of sketch drawings, there are several limitations in
the current approach we wish to highlight. For most single-class datasets, sketch-rnn is capable
of modelling sketches up to around 300 data points. The model becomes increasingly difficult to
train beyond this length. For our dataset, we applied the Ramer–Douglas–Peucker algorithm [3] to
simplify the strokes of the sketch data to less than 200 data points while still keeping most of the
important visual information of each sketch.

Figure 3: Unconditional generated sketches of frogs, cats, and crabs at τ = 0.8.
For more complicated classes of images, such as mermaids or lobsters, the reconstruction loss metrics
are not as good compared to simpler classes such as ants, faces or firetrucks. The models trained on
these more challenging image classes tend to draw smoother, more circular line segments that do not
resemble individual sketches, but rather resemble an averaging of many sketches in the training set.
We can see some of this artifact in the frog class, in Figure 3. This smoothness may be analogous
to the blurriness effect produced by a Variational Autoencoder [8] that is trained on pixel images.
Depending on the use case of the model, smooth circular lines can be viewed as aesthetically pleasing
and a desirable property.

Figure 4: Unconditional generations from model trained on 75 classes (left),
From model trained on crab, face, pig and rabbit classes (right).
While both conditional and unconditional models are capable of training on datasets consisting of
several classes, such as (cat, pig), and (crab, face, pig, rabbit), sketch-rnn is ineffective at modelling
a large number of classes simultaneously. In Figure 4, we sample sketches using an unconditional
model trained on 75 classes, and a model trained on 4 classes. The samples generated from the
75-class model are incoherent, with individual sketches displaying features from multiple classes.
The four-class unconditional model usually generates samples of a single class, but occasionally also
combines features from multiple classes. In the future, we will explore incorporating class information
outside of the latent space to handle the modelling of a large number of classes simultaneously.
3

5 Multi-Sketch Drawing Interpolation

Figure 5: Example of conditional generated sketches with single class models.
Latent space interpolation from left to right, and then top to bottom.
In addition to interpolating between two sketches, like in Figure 5, we can also visualize the
interpolation between four sketches in latent space to gain further insight from the model. In this
section we show more examples conditionally generated with sketch-rnn. We take four generated
images, place them on four corners of a grid, and populate the rest of the grid using the interpolation
of the latent vectors at the corners. Figure 6 shows two examples of this four-way interpolation, using
models trained on both (cat, pig) classes, and face class. All samples generated with τ = 0.1.

Figure 6: Example input sketches and sketch-rnn generated reproductions (Top),
Latent space interpolation between the four reproduced sketches (Bottom).
The left side of Figure 7 visualizes the interpolation between a full pig, a rabbit’s head, a crab, and a
face, using a model trained on these four classes. In certain parts of the space between a crab and a
face is a rabbit’s head, and we see that the ears of the rabbit becomes the crab’s claws. Applying the
model on the yoga class, it is interesting to see how one yoga position slowly transitions to another
via a set of interpolated yoga positions generated by the model. For visual effect, we also interpolate
between four distinct colors, and color each sketch using a unique interpolated color.
4

Figure 7: Interpolation of (pig, rabbit, crab and face), yoga poses, mosquitoes and mermaids.
We also interpolate between four distinct colors for visual effect.
We also construct latent space interpolation examples for the mosquito class and the mermaid class,
in the last two grids Figure 7. We see that the model can interpolate between concepts such as style
of wings, leg counts, and orientation. In Figure 8 below, we show more interpolation examples of
other classes from the dataset.

Figure 8: Latent space interpolation between four generated gardens, owls, cats, and firetrucks.

6 Which Loss Controls Image Coherency?
We would like to question the relative importance of the reconstruction loss term LR , relative to the
KL loss term LKL , when our goal is to produce higher quality image reconstructions. While our
reconstruction loss term LR optimizes for the log-likelihood of the set of strokes that make up a
sketch, this metric alone does not give us any guarantee that a model with a lower LR number will
produce higher quality reconstructions compared to a model with a higher LR number.
For example, imagine a simple sketch of an face, ,, where most of the data points of S are be used to
represent the head, and only a minority of points represent facial features such as the eyes and mouth.
It is possible to reconstruct the face with incoherent facial features, and yet still score a lower LR
number compared to another reconstruction with a coherent and similar face, if the edges around the
incoherent face are generated more precisely.
In Figure 9, we compare the reconstructed images generated using models trained with various wKL
settings. In the first three examples from the left, we train our model on a dataset consisting of four
image classes (crab, face, pig, rabbit). We deliberately sketch input drawings that contain features of
two classes, such as a rabbit with a pig mouth and pig tail, a person with animal ears, and a rabbit with
crab claws. We see that the model trained using higher wKL weights, tend to generate sketches with
features of a single class that look more coherent, despite having lower LKL numbers. For instance,
the model with wKL = 1.00 omit pig features, animal ears, and crab claws from its reconstructions.
In contrast, the model with wKL = 0.25, with higher LKL , but lower LR numbers tries to keep both
inconsistent features, while generating sketches that look less coherent.
In the last three examples in Figure 9, we repeat the experiment on models trained on single-class
images, and see similar results even when we deliberately choose input samples from the test set with
noisier lines.
If we look at the interpolations produced in the Latent Space Interpolation section in the main text,
models with better KL loss terms also generate more meaningful reconstructions from the interpolated
5

Figure 9: Reconstructions of sketch images using models with various wKL settings.
space between two latent vectors. This suggests the latent vector for models with lower LKL control
more meaningful parts of the drawings, such as controlling whether the sketch is an animal head
only or a full animal with a body, or whether to draw a cat head or a pig head. Altering such latent
vectors can allow us to directly manipulate these animal features. Conversely, altering the latent
codes of models with higher LKL results in scattered movement of individual line segments, rather
than alterations of meaningful conceptual features of the animal.
This result is consistent with incoherent reconstructions seen in Figure 9. With a lower LKL , the
model is likely to generate coherent images given any random z. Even with a non-standard, or noisy,
input image, the model will still encode a z that produces coherent images. For models with lower
LKL numbers, the encoded latent vectors contain conceptual features belonging to the input image,
while for models with higher LKL numbers, the latent vectors merely encode information about
specific line segments. This observation suggests that when using sketch-rnn on a new dataset, we
should first try different wKL settings to evaluate the tradeoff between LR and LKL , and then choose
a setting for wKL (and KLmin ) that best suit our requirements.

7 Acknowledgements
We thank Ian Johnson, Jonas Jongejan, Martin Wattenberg, Mike Schuster, Thomas Deselaers,
Ben Poole, Kyle Kastner, Junyoung Chung and Kyle McDonald for their help with this project. This
work was done as part of the Google Brain Residency program (g.co/brainresidency).

References
[1] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. Layer normalization. NIPS, 2016.
[2] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. M. Dai, R. Józefowicz, and S. Bengio. Generating Sentences from
a Continuous Space. CoRR, abs/1511.06349, 2015.
[3] D. H. Douglas and T. K. Peucker. Algorithms for the reduction of the number of points required to represent
a digitized line or its caricature. Cartographica: The International Journal for Geographic Information and
Geovisualization, 10(2):112–122, Oct. 1973.
[4] J. Jongejan, H. Rowley, T. Kawashima, J. Kim, and N. Fox-Gieg. The Quick, Draw! - A.I. Experiment.
https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/, 2016.
[5] C. Kaae Sønderby, T. Raiko, L. Maaløe, S. Kaae Sønderby, and O. Winther. Ladder Variational Autoencoders.
ArXiv e-prints, Feb. 2016.
[6] D. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
[7] D. P. Kingma, T. Salimans, and M. Welling. Improving variational inference with inverse autoregressive
flow. CoRR, abs/1606.04934, 2016.
[8] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. ArXiv e-prints, Dec. 2013.
[9] S. Semeniuta, A. Severyn, and E. Barth. Recurrent dropout without memory loss. arXiv:1603.05118, 2016.

6

